---
title: Mini-Project 7
subtitle: Word clouds and other analysis tools
summary: |
  In this project, you will build "word clouds" of the most common
  words in texts.
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this project. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your solution.  If you
  receive help from anyone, make sure to cite them in your responses. 
link: true
notes: |  
  Make sure to require that they use hash tables to count.
  Make sure to require that they test it on a reasonably large file.
  Consider ways to autograde.
---
# {{ page.title }} : {{ page.subtitle }}

As you may know, a "word cloud" (also ["tag cloud"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tag_cloud)) is a visual representation of the most common words in a text (usually ignoring "common words", such as "a", "an", and "the").  The words are grouped in an approximately oval shape, with the dize of a word representing the approximate frequency in which the word appears in the text.

Some analysts promote word clouds because they provide a visually stimulating way to get an overview of the topics in a text.  Others note that word clouds may promote inappropriate conclusions, since we tend to assume nearby words are related, but most word-cloud algorithms do not use proximity in the text to compute proximity in the image.

Your assignment is to write a procedure, `(word-cloud filename)`, that builds a word cloud for the given file.  That is, it takes a filename (a string) as input, reads all the words from the file and computes their frequences (hint: hash tables), generates an appropriate-sized word image for each of the top 50, and puts them together into a single image.

I strongly recommend that you decompose the problem into smaller pieces.

Note that the `(file->words filename)` procedure (in the CSC-151 library) will give you a list of all the words in a file (as strings).

You can earn an M if you use a straightforward algorithm to put them together into a single image, such as stacking the words on top of each other.  (No, that's not much of a cloud.)  To earn an E, you will need to develop a more sophisticated algorithm.

Save your code in the file `word-cloud.rkt`.  Also include a file, `sample.png`, that shows a particularly successful cloud you generated.  Make sure to include a comment in `word-cloud.rkt` that explains how you generated that cloud (e.g., the source text).

Grading rubric
--------------

_This rubric is still in draft form._

### Redo or above

Submissions that lack any of these characteristics will get an I.

```
[ ] Passes all of the one-star autograder tests.
[ ] Includes the specified file, `word-cloud.rkt`.
[ ] Includes an appropriate header on the file that indicates the
    course, author, etc.
[ ] Acknowledges appropriately.
[ ] Code runs in DrRacket.
[ ] The procedure `word-cloud` takes a filename as input and generates
    an image.
[ ] Includes the file `sample.png`.
```

### Meets expectations or above

Submissions that lack any of these characteristics but have all of the
prior characteristics will get an R.

```
[ ] Passes all of the two-star autograder tests.
[ ] Code is well-formatted with appropriate names and indentation.
[ ] Code has been reformatted with Ctrl-I before submitting.
[ ] Code generally follows style guidelines.
[ ] All procedures are documented in the correct form.
[ ] `word-cloud` has been appropriatelly decomposed into at least three 
    subprocedures.
[ ] Explains how `sample.png` was generated.
```

### Exemplary / Exceeds expectations

Submissions that lack any of these characteristics but have all of the
prior characteristics will get an M.

```
[ ] Passes all of the three-star autograder tests.
[ ] Style is impeccable (or nearly so).
[ ] Avoids repeated work.  In particular, avoids identical recursive calls.
[ ] Uses a non-trivial algorithm to build the cloud _and_ explains how
    the algorithm works.
[ ] Removes the most common words in English (e.g., "The", "A").
[ ] Ensures that various capitalized versions of the same word are treated
    as identical (e.g., "ahoy", "Ahoy", "AHOY").
[ ] Builds the frequency table in a sensible way (e.g., using a hash
    table).
[ ] Can handle files with thousands of words in a reasonable timeframe.
```

### Extra praise

These additional characteristics won't affect your grade, but may be worth considering.

```
[ ] Handles files with fewer than 50 unique words.
[ ] Uses color or typeface to indicate some additional characteristic
    of the word.  (Should be explained in the documentation.)
```

Questions and answers
---------------------

I'm not sure how to make text.

> The [documentation for the `text-font` procedure](https://docs.racket-lang.org/teachpack/2htdpimage.html#%28def._%28%28lib._2htdp%2Fimage..rkt%29._text%2Ffont%29%29) should help.

I'm struggling with an algorithm to build the word cloud.

> You could look for some of the ones on the Interweb.

> You could think about building smaller blocks and putting them together
  (perhaps arranging them by size in a hash table).

> You might explore what you can do with scenes and [the `place-image` procedure](https://docs.racket-lang.org/teachpack/2htdpimage.html#%28def._%28%28lib._2htdp%2Fimage..rkt%29._place-image%29%29).

I'd like a sample file for testing.

> How about the text of this assignment?

> You can find lots of public domain texts at [Project Gutenberg](https://www.gutenberg.org).

What does "explain how the algorithm works" mean? In the documentation? As a comment?

> As a comment in the documentation.  You can put it before the `word-cloud` procedure (or one of its helpers).  You can put it at the top of the file.  I'd prefer the latter.

Can we use any filename?

> Your procedure should work as long as it's a valid filename for a file containing text.

Can we use any file?

> I'd prefer that your content is not in bad taste.  And no slurs allowed.

Is there a cadr equivalent for hash tables? A way to compare two elements of a hash table within a recursive function, such as when implementing min or max?

> There is not a `cadr` equivalent for hash taables.  There's not even a `car`.

> However, you can get a list of all the keys or a list of all the key/value
  pairs.

> I'd also suggest that you review [the lab on hash tables](../code/labs/hash-tables.rkt).

The rubric makes it sound like recursion is required.  Where?

> That part of the rubric comes from the previous assignment.  But I
  assume you'll need to recurse over a list of words or a list of the
  images you've built from those words.


